Added the docs for all the grafana dashboards. (#21795)
hashicorp/consul: website/content/docs/connect/observability/grafanadashboards/consuldataplanedashboard.mdx

---
layout: docs
page_title: Service Mesh Observability - Consul Dataplane Dashboard
description: >-
  This documentation provides an overview of the Consul Dataplane dashboard.
---

# Consul DataPlane Dashboard

> The **Consul DataPlane Dashboard** provides a comprehensive view of the service health, performance, and resource utilization within the Consul service mesh. It enables operators to monitor key metrics at both the cluster and service levels, helping ensure service reliability and performance.

Author: Need to fix this link once the pr is complete for the dashboards.

---
layout: docs
page_title: Dashboard for Consul dataplane metrics
description: >-
  This Grafana dashboard that provides Consul dataplane metrics on Kubernetes deployments. Learn about the Grafana queries that produce the metrics and visualizations in this dashboard.
---

# Consul dataplane monitoring dashboard

> This page provides reference information about the Grafana dashboard configuration included in [this GitHub repository](https://github.com/YasminLorinKaygalak/GrafanaDemo/tree/main). The Consul dataplane dashboard provides a comprehensive view of the service health, performance, and resource utilization within the Consul service mesh. 

Reviewer: Yes, the PR just merged we will update it.

### Total failed requests

- **Grafana query:** `sum(increase(envoy_cluster_upstream_rq_xx{...}[10m]))`
- **Description:** This pie chart shows the total number of failed requests within the service mesh, categorized by service. It provides a visual breakdown of where failures are occurring, allowing operators to focus on problematic services.

### Requests per second

- **Grafana query:** `sum(rate(envoy_http_downstream_rq_total{...}[5m]))`
- **Description:** This metric shows the rate of incoming HTTP requests per second to the selected services. It helps operators understand the current load on services and how much traffic they are processing.

### Unhealthy clusters

- **Grafana query:** `(sum(envoy_cluster_membership_healthy{...}) - sum(envoy_cluster_membership_total{...}))`
- **Description:** This metric tracks the number of unhealthy clusters in the mesh, helping operators identify services that are experiencing issues and need attention to ensure operational health.

### Heap size

- **Grafana query:** `SUM(envoy_server_memory_heap_size{app=~"$service"})`

> - **Description:** This metric displays the total memory heap size of the Envoy proxies. Monitoring heap size is essential to detect memory issues and ensure that services are operating efficiently.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Description:** This metric displays the total memory heap size of the Envoy proxies.
```
I think this last part should be omitted because the heap size is really dependent on how the proxy is configure, the number of connections it is processing, etc. Proxies that are processing high volumes of traffic may have larger heap sizes than proxies that are fronting lower traffic services. The mere presence of a large heap size alone is not indicative of a problem. Operators would need to evaluate other metrics to determine if the heap allocation is unusual given the traffic load and configuration profile of a given proxy.

### Allocated memory

- **Grafana query:** `SUM(envoy_server_memory_allocated{app=~"$service"})`

> - **Description:** This metric shows the amount of memory allocated by the Envoy proxies. It helps operators monitor the resource usage of services to prevent memory overuse and optimize performance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Description:** This metric shows the amount of memory allocated by the Envoy proxies.
```

### Avg uptime per node

- **Grafana query:** `avg(envoy_server_uptime{app=~"$service"})`

> - **Description:** This metric calculates the average uptime of Envoy proxies across all nodes. It helps operators monitor the stability of services and detect potential issues with service restarts or crashes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Description:** This metric calculates the average uptime of Envoy proxies across all nodes. Use it to monitor the overall stability of services and detect potential issues with service restarts or crashes.
```

### Cluster state

- **Grafana query:** `(sum(envoy_cluster_membership_total{...}) - sum(envoy_cluster_membership_healthy{...})) == bool 0`

> - **Description:** This metric indicates whether all clusters are healthy. It provides a quick overview of the cluster state to ensure that there are no issues affecting service performance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Description:** This metric indicates whether all clusters are healthy. It provides a quick overview of the cluster state to ensure that there are no issues affecting service performance.
```
As far as I can tel, this tracks the number of members in a given cluster. This number is going to vary per logical service based on the number of provisioned upstream instances. I don't know that it makes sense to track this other than to see how many service instances are online at a given time.

### Memory usage by pod limits

- **Grafana query:** `100 * max(container_memory_working_set_bytes{namespace=~"$namespace"}
 / kube_pod_container_resource_limits{resource="memory"})`
- **Description:** This metric shows memory usage as a percentage of the memory limit set for each pod. It helps operators ensure that services are staying within their allocated memory limits to avoid performance degradation.

### CPU usage by pod limits

- **Grafana query:** `100 * max(container_cpu_usage{namespace=~"$namespace"} / kube_pod_container_resource_limits{resource="cpu"})`
- **Description:** This metric displays CPU usage as a percentage of the CPU limit set for each pod. Monitoring CPU usage helps operators optimize service performance and prevent CPU exhaustion.

### Total active upstream connections

- **Grafana query:** `sum(envoy_cluster_upstream_cx_active{app=~"$service"})`
- **Description:** This metric tracks the total number of active upstream connections to other services in the mesh. It provides insight into service dependencies and network load.

### Total active downstream connections

- **Grafana query:** `sum(envoy_http_downstream_cx_active{app=~"$service"})`

> - **Description:** This metric tracks the total number of active downstream connections from services to clients. It helps operators monitor service load and ensure that services are able to handle the traffic effectively.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Description:** This metric tracks the total number of active downstream connections to a given service. It helps operators monitor service load and ensure that services are able to handle the traffic effectively.
```
